15 July, 2021

# Risk of industrial development to migrating whooping cranes (*Grus americana*) in the Oil Sands Region of Alberta, Canada

## Executive Summary

The last remaining wild, self-sustaining population of whooping cranes
(*Grus americana*, hereafter cranes) is the Aransas-Wood Buffalo
population (AWBP), containing approximately 500 individuals (Pearse et
al. 2018). This population winters in the Aransas National Wildlife
Refuge on the gulf coast of Texas, USA, and spends summers in an around
Wood Buffalo National Park (WBNP) in northern Alberta, Canada and
adjacent areas in Northwest Territories (Environment Canada 2007). The
heavily industrialized Oil Sands Region (OSR) of northeastern Alberta is
just south of the breeding grounds. Therefore, the majority of the AWBP
passes through the OSR twice yearly during migration, creating potential
direct and indirect risks to migrating individuals from industrial
development (M. Bidwell, Environment and Climate Change Canada,
*unpublished report*). Direct risks might include collision with
powerlines and other industrial features during flight, and exposure to
harmful chemicals when landing in or around industrial water features
such as tailings ponds (Mundy et al. 2019). Indirect risks include loss
or reduced availability of high quality migratory habitat due to
avoidance (Hebblewhite and Merrill 2008, Harris and Mirande 2013), or
reduced connectivity of important stopover habitat features . An
important first step to understanding and mitigating these risks is
modeling habitat selection and mapping habitat use throughout the region
(Crosby et al. *manuscript in progress*). The next important step,
however, is to understand potential population-level exposure to direct
and indirect risks. The objectives of this analysis are to: 1) quantify
population-level exposure of cranes to potential industrial hazards; 2)
estimate migratory habitat loss as a result of proximity to industrial
features; and 3) estimate reduction in migratory habitat connectivity as
a result of industrial development. The results of this analysis will
provide managers and policy makers with important information with which
to develop tools and regulations for mitigating potential conflicts
between migrating cranes and industrial development.

## Literature Cited

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
line-spacing="2">

<div id="ref-EnvironmentCanada2007" class="csl-entry">

Environment Canada. 2007. <span class="nocase">Recovery Strategy for the
Whooping Crane (Grus americana) in Canada. Species at Risk Act Recovery
Strategy Series</span>. Environment Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

</div>

<div id="ref-Harris2013" class="csl-entry">

Harris, J., and C. Mirande. 2013. <span class="nocase">A global overview
of cranes: status, threats and conservation priorities</span>. Chinese
Birds 4:189–209.

</div>

<div id="ref-Hebblewhite2008" class="csl-entry">

Hebblewhite, M., and E. Merrill. 2008. <span class="nocase">Modelling
wildlife-human relationships for social species with mixed-effects
resource selection models</span>. Journal of Applied Ecology 45:834–844.

</div>

<div id="ref-Mundy2019" class="csl-entry">

Mundy, L. J., K. L. Williams, S. Chiu, B. D. Pauli, and D. Crump. 2019.
<span class="nocase">Extracts of Passive Samplers Deployed in Variably
Contaminated Wetlands in the Athabasca Oil Sands Region Elicit
Biochemical and Transcriptomic Effects in Avian Hepatocytes</span>.
Environmental Science & Technology 53:9192–9202.

</div>

<div id="ref-Pearse2018" class="csl-entry">

Pearse, A. T., M. Rabbe, L. M. Juliusson, M. T. Bidwell, L. Craig-Moore,
D. A. Brandt, and W. Harrell. 2018. <span class="nocase">Delineating and
identifying long-term changes in the whooping crane (Grus americana)
migration corridor</span>. PLOS ONE 13:e0192737.

</div>

</div>
